Pkgdown-quillt (#313)
rstudio/flexdashboard: vignettes/theme.Rmd

---
title: "Theming flexdashboard"
resource_files:
  - snippets
---

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
library(quillt)
```

## Using Bootstrap

The `flex_dashboard` output format gives you access to the [Bootstrap CSS framework](https://getbootstrap.com/). Bootstrap is a library of reusable chunks of HTML, CSS, and JavaScript code that you can call on to modify your flexdashboard without writing that code yourself. Originally [created by and for Twitter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bootstrap_(front-end_framework)), it is a free and open source project; you can view the repository on [GitHub](https://github.com/twbs/bootstrap). 

The `flex_dashboard` output format includes a `theme` parameter for customizing the overall appearance of the dashboard. This parameter has special awareness of the [`{bslib}` package](https://rstudio.github.io/bslib/), which provides tools for using the [Bootstrap CSS framework](https://getbootstrap.com/) directly from R. For now, you'll need to install the development version of the package to use it:

``` {.r}
# install.packages("remotes")
remotes::install_github("rstudio/bslib")

> ```

Reviewer: Just to be sure here: dev **bslib** is required for this vignettes ? 
Dev **flexdashboard** also right ?

I am starting thinking about what to write for **rmarkdown** so I am curious. Thanks.

Reviewer 2: Strictly speaking it's not necessary, but there are some important fixes/additions

Reviewer: Perfect. Thanks ! 

I think will update the requirement in **rmarkdown** when you version hit CRAN then. thanks!

``` {.yaml}
output:
  flexdashboard::flex_dashboard:
    theme:
      version: 4
      heading_font:
        google: 
          family: Fraunces
          wght: "100..300"
```

### Using Bootswatch themes

Using the `theme` parameter, you have access to a library of pre-made custom themes built for Bootstrap called [Bootswatch](https://bootswatch.com/). The `theme` parameter can be set to any named Bootswatch theme (in lowercase) built for [Bootstrap version 3](https://bootswatch.com/3/) or [version 4](https://bootswatch.com/).

For example, here's how you could give your dashboard a [(Bootswatch 4) Minty theme](https://bootswatch.com/minty/).

``` {.yaml}
---
output:
  flexdashboard::flex_dashboard:
    theme: 
      version: 4
      bootswatch: minty
---
```

This screenshot shows the result of applying the above `theme` to [this example dashboard](https://gist.github.com/cpsievert/04bedbe9af652fab8c24a5e5eee0d721) that [uses Shiny](shiny.html) (subsequent screenshots also use this example, but swap out different `theme`s).

![](images/theme-minty.png){.snippet}

### Custom Bootstrap themes

> You can also create your own custom theme by setting the [main colors and fonts](https://rstudio.github.io/bslib/articles/theming.html#main-colors-fonts) (e.g., `bg`, `fg`, `primary`, `base_font`, `code_font`, etc.) as well as more specific theming options, [such as `navbar-bg`](https://rstudio.github.io/bslib/articles/bs4-variables.html#navbar-bg). Under the hood, this works by passing the `theme` to `bslib::bs_theme()` which influences the final look of the page by creating a custom build of Bootstrap (and Flexdashboard) CSS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also create your own [custom `{bslib}` theme](https://rstudio.github.io/bslib/articles/bslib.html#custom-themes) by setting the main colors and fonts (e.g., `bg`, `fg`, `primary`, `base_font`, `code_font`, etc.) as well as [more specific theming](https://rstudio.github.io/bslib/articles/bslib.html#everything-else) options, [such as `navbar-bg`](https://rstudio.github.io/bslib/articles/bs4-variables.html#navbar-bg). Under the hood, this works by passing the `theme` to `bslib::bs_theme()` which influences the final look of the page by creating a custom build of Bootstrap (and Flexdashboard) CSS.
```

``` {.r}
---
output:
  flexdashboard::flex_dashboard:
    theme:
      version: 4
      bg: "#101010"
      fg: "#FDF7F7" 
      primary: "#ED79F9"
      navbar-bg: "#3ADAC6"
      base_font: 
        google: Prompt
      code_font:
        google: JetBrains Mono
---
```

![](images/theme-dark.png){.snippet}

As shown above, a major benefit of theming via `{bslib}` is that theming of things like `gauge()`, `valueBox()`, and even `DT::datatable()` "just work" (that is, their styling defaults are informed by the `{bslib}` theme).

These components work with `{bslib}`'s real-time theming widget, which you can add to `flex_dashboard` by adding either:

-   `runtime: shiny` to the document's yaml matter and calling `bslib::bs_themer()` in any code chunk, or

-   `runtime: shinyrmd` to the document's yaml matter and calling `bslib::bs_themer()` in a code chunk with `context='server'`:

        ```{r setup, include = FALSE, context = "server"}`r ''`
        bslib::bs_themer()
        ```

![](images/real-time.gif){.snippet}

### Theme output

> Generally, most "un-opinionated" HTML content rendered by the web browser "just works" with `{bslib}`. This means that the styles you specify for your document will cascade correctly. However, some HTML elements that aren't rendered by the browser aren't necessarily aware of `{bslib}` (or CSS in general).

Reviewer 2: "styles you specify" sounds like custom CSS, which doesn't cascade in the same way Sass variables do

```suggestion
Generally, most "un-opinionated" HTML content rendered by the web browser should "just works" with your `theme` settings. However, some HTML elements that aren't rendered by the browser aren't necessarily aware of `{bslib}` (or CSS in general).
```

To theme static R plots (e.g., `{ggplot2}`), you can call `thematic::thematic_rmd()` in a setup chunk to translate the `{bslib}` theme main colors to R plot theming defaults.

Additionally, if you're using Google Fonts, or some other font that you've registered with R, you can safely include `font = "auto"` to translate fonts as well:

    ```{r setup, include = FALSE}`r ''`
    thematic::thematic_rmd(font = "auto")
    ```

![](images/theme-plot.png){.snippet}

If you use one of the `{ggplot2}` [complete themes](https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org/reference/ggtheme.html) (like `theme_bw()` or `theme_minimal()`, for example), we recommend setting the theme globally for the `flex_dashboard` in a `setup` chunk, then turning thematic on *after*.

    ```{r setup, include = FALSE}`r ''`
    library(ggplot2)
    theme_set(theme_minimal())
    thematic::thematic_rmd(font = "auto")
    ```
    
Read more about the `{thematic}` package here: 

> `vignette("custom", package = "thematic")`.

Reviewer: Not sure why but there is no autolink to the thematic package. That is too bad as it could be possible. Maybe some requirements are missing for this: https://pkgdown.r-lib.org/articles/linking.html

![](images/penguin-extend.png){.snippet}

You may also reuse any [fonts](#using-fonts) specified in your YAML with SASS variables.

| YAML key       | Bootstrap 4 variable     |
|----------------|--------------------------|
| `heading_font` | `$headings-font-family`  |
| `base_font`    | `$font-family-base`      |
| `code_font`    | `$font-family-monospace` |

So we could set up the following rule:
``` {.scss}
.pkg-name {
  background-color: $cyan;
  color: $white;
  font-family: $font-family-monospace;
  padding: .5rem;
}
```

Then use it in the body:

```{.html}
I like the [flexdashboard]{.pkg-name} package.
```

Here is the knitted output:

![](images/penguin-reuse.png){.snippet}

## Resources

This vignette just scratches the surface of how to use Bootstrap variables and SASS together. Both are powerful tools for customizing the look and feel of your HTML documents. To learn more, see:

-   Bootstrap docs: <https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.0/>
-   Sass docs: <https://sass-lang.com/documentation>
-   The bslib package docs (for Bootstrap): https://rstudio.github.io/bslib/
-   The sass package docs (for fonts): https://rstudio.github.io/sass/

> -   The thematic package docs (for theming output): https://rstudio.github.io/thematic/

Reviewer: @apreshill Do we want to promote `https://pkgs.rstudio.com` ?

The current config already allow to access those website. Ex: https://pkgs.rstudio.com/thematic/, https://pkgs.rstudio.com/sass/

library(quillt)
```

## Using Bootstrap

> The `flex_dashboard` output format gives you access to the [Bootstrap CSS framework](https://getbootstrap.com/). Bootstrap is a library of reusable chunks of HTML, CSS, and JavaScript code that you can call on to modify your flexdashboard without writing that code yourself. Originally [created by and for Twitter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bootstrap_(front-end_framework)), it is a free and open source project; you can view the repository on [GitHub](https://github.com/twbs/bootstrap). 

Reviewer 2: It feels slightly better to me to change "gives you access to" -> "builds upon"

The `flex_dashboard` output format includes a `theme` parameter for customizing the overall appearance of the dashboard. This parameter has special awareness of the [`{bslib}` package](https://rstudio.github.io/bslib/), which provides tools for using the [Bootstrap CSS framework](https://getbootstrap.com/) directly from R. For now, you'll need to install the development version of the package to use it:

``` {.r}
# install.packages("remotes")
remotes::install_github("rstudio/bslib")
```

The minimum YAML for invoking the `{bslib}` package is:

``` {.yaml}
---
output:
  flexdashboard::flex_dashboard:
    theme: 
      version: 4
---
```

> Bootstrap has several versions (at the time of writing, version 4 is the most recent). If you are starting on a fresh project, we recommend using the latest version. We also recommend you set the Bootstrap version in your YAML for better reproducibility. 

Reviewer 2: I'd like to keep [this section](https://rstudio.github.io/bslib/articles/bslib.html#bootstrap-versions) as the "single source of truth" as to what the current/supported versions are (i.e., I don't want to have to update a bunch of docs everytime we change the default version)

![](images/penguin-extend.png){.snippet}

You may also reuse any [fonts](#using-fonts) specified in your YAML with SASS variables.

| YAML key       | Bootstrap 4 variable     |
|----------------|--------------------------|
| `heading_font` | `$headings-font-family`  |
| `base_font`    | `$font-family-base`      |
| `code_font`    | `$font-family-monospace` |

So we could set up the following rule:
``` {.scss}
.pkg-name {
  background-color: $cyan;
  color: $white;
  font-family: $font-family-monospace;
  padding: .5rem;
}
```

Then use it in the body:

```{.html}
I like the [flexdashboard]{.pkg-name} package.
```

Here is the knitted output:

![](images/penguin-reuse.png){.snippet}

## Resources

This vignette just scratches the surface of how to use Bootstrap variables and SASS together. Both are powerful tools for customizing the look and feel of your HTML documents. To learn more, see:

-   Bootstrap docs: <https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.0/>
-   Sass docs: <https://sass-lang.com/documentation>
-   The bslib package docs (for Bootstrap): https://rstudio.github.io/bslib/
-   The sass package docs (for fonts): https://rstudio.github.io/sass/

> -   The thematic package docs (for theming output): https://rstudio.github.io/thematic/

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-   The thematic package docs (for theming plot output): https://rstudio.github.io/thematic/
```
